---
title: Pursuing flow
path: /pursuing-flow
date: 2020-09-27
---

# Pursuing flow

David Hanameier Hansson (DHH) is co-founder of Basecamp, 24 Hours Le
Mans racing champion, and founder of the web framework Ruby on Rails.

During a discussion with Tim Ferris, David spoke of a core life concept
that he consistently optimizes for: flow states.

He describes it as a mental zone; a period of focus towards an activity,
be it a coding project to competitively racing. It’s an area where all
the stars align. Curiosity thrives, time is lost, and life, quite simply
thrives.

A key insight is finding the “tug” –– finding a thread that gives way,
that keeps you continuously pulling for more. A feedback-centered loop,
driven by deep curiosity and enjoyment. For David, he found flow through
competitive racing and also programming software in Ruby. And as he
developed an eye for both these activities, cultivating flow became not
just a one-off occurrence, but more of a consistent state.

As he grew more comfortable within the domain, he realized that his
goals morphed from simple static targets, “I just need to get text on
the screen”, to systems problems, “How can I optimize this?” He no
longer needed to care as intensely about the basics. He was now afforded
the freedoms to focus on the complexities.

The problem focus suddenly transforms into something totally new: as he
quickly grappled over the certain particularities of a subject (eg. the
low-level details –– the slip angles, the acceleration speeds, and
braking responses), the number of variables grew exponentially. And his
mind filled with new bounds of possibilities; it was a whole new world,
beautiful, magical, and inspiring.

And that’s where I’ve found I need to go. To identify that thread, to
pull and to keep on pulling. I have encountered these flow states only a
few times in my life. My most memorable and poignant moments were in
middle school, days that were happily filled with hacking the game
Minecraft.

Hours devoted to testing single lines of code, perusing forums, and
shamelessly copying others’ creations to tweak and modify. I learned so
much in such a seemingly short time space; I was lost in it. As I slowly
learned the game dynamics, decompiling source code, removing player
properties to test out the effects, debug after debug, I soon began to
shift from the “I just need to text appear” to “How can I make this code
the best it can be?” And my journey into flow states quickly began. I’d
lose sight of time, the day, and everything else. When I realized I had
actually moved on from copying others’ code to actually developing and
testing out my own features, I was utterly eudaimonic. I
was finally independent. I could think creatively. I could pursue my own
ideas. And that was beautiful.

But now I don’t game anymore, much less hack games.

And now, I’m in the open air, ungrounded, and not quite sure where to
proceed, or where my destination may lie. I’m not necessarily haunted by
it though; I have some inner fears, and most definitely some doubts, but
I also think that’s natural. I hope to find that path again, to find a
thread that I can tug at, and keep pulling.

There are, of course, an incredibly large range of subjects to pursue.
How can one decide? In my short time alive, I’ve found that no matter
how lost I may have been, I have at least found some way or another to
enjoy the things of life.

Look back. See what you’ve liked to do, and what you’ve disliked. This
can be a starting point. Of all the things of life you can choose from,
I’ve found these four characteristics (that mirror my own forays into
programming) are vital to finding that thread.

1.  A short, iterative feedback loop

2.  Defined goals

3.  Possibility

4.  Easy Entrance

 


